[Amit Varma]: There was a time when we all agreed on what the facts were.
[Amit Varma]: We all got our news of the world from certain trusted sources.
[Amit Varma]: We may have considered some of them biased, but they were part of a broad consensus on
[Amit Varma]: the truth.
[Amit Varma]: They all said the earth was round, and we had no reason to believe otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: Today, though, the media is fragmented and there is no consensus on the truth anymore.
[Amit Varma]: The earth is round, and it's also flat, cubical, rectangular, and shaped like a lotus.
[Amit Varma]: News today has become a game of supplying what people want to believe, and we all live
[Amit Varma]: in our own alternate realities.
[Amit Varma]: What are we to do?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: In today's episode, I want to discuss the state of the media, and my guest today is
[Amit Varma]: a man I consider the sharpest media commentator in India, a veteran editor, legendary journalist,
[Amit Varma]: and my close friend, Prem Panikkar.
[Amit Varma]: I recorded this conversation with Prem on the sidelines of the Bangalore Literature
[Amit Varma]: Festival a few weeks ago, so without much further ado, here we go.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, Prem.
[Guest]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me on, Amit.
[Guest]: You know, I'm not being paid to say this.
[Guest]: Seen and The Unseen is my favorite podcast because there's a lot of issues that should
[Guest]: be looked at in depth and detail, particularly crucial now when the media has time for neither
[Guest]: depth nor detail.
[Guest]: And this is just about the only place you get it.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: That's very kind of you to say that.
[Amit Varma]: And I, you know, I give the credit to all the guests I get on the show, who are usually
[Amit Varma]: people with deep insight of the subjects, and I can't think of a better example of that
[Amit Varma]: than you.
[Amit Varma]: Like today, what I really want to talk about and something I've been both concerned deeply
[Amit Varma]: about and saddened deeply by is the state of the media in India.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we've both been a part of media for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: You've been a journalist since the early 90s.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written a lot of piercing essays about what is going wrong with us today.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, starting from what the media was like back when you started, and what it
[Amit Varma]: has become today, what's your journey been like?
[Guest]: Well, the thing is that back when I started, which was 89, actually, with the Indian Post,
[Guest]: you didn't have you had a very clear idea of what any and the caveat here is we're talking
[Guest]: of the English language media, because the language media is a whole other animal altogether
[Guest]: and probably outside the scope of the time that we have.
[Guest]: You had a very clear sense of direction simply because you didn't have too many disruptors
[Guest]: that were constantly shifting the goalposts on you without your, you know, without your
[Guest]: even knowing it.
[Guest]: I think the seminal moment in this entire thing was when the internet happened.
[Guest]: And even back in the early days, you were a part of this, you know, this, when the internet
[Guest]: first came to India, you basically had media organizations shoveling their stuff onto onto
[Guest]: the net as almost a hygiene element.
[Guest]: And you had very few standalone media houses that did not have a print or television equivalent,
[Guest]: American for that you were part of, was a highly niche product with a with a very loyal
[Guest]: sticky audience reader for the generalist.
[Guest]: And even then, things were very clear, you knew who you were speaking to, you knew what
[Guest]: your core competence was, and you knew who your audience was.
[Guest]: What has happened now is that this explosion in multiple directions has diffused the landscape
[Guest]: to such an extent that the goalposts are no longer visible.
[Guest]: It's not even a question of shifting goalposts.
[Guest]: I think the media and you know what, the first thing that that it feels like to me right
[Guest]: now is the climax of Ridley Scott's Thelma and Lewis.
[Guest]: You've got two people who for you know, prompted by internal fault lines, and external stresses,
[Guest]: drive up a road knowing that it leads to a dead end to a cliff top.
[Guest]: And having got there, there's no place else to go, you just put pedal to the metal and
[Guest]: drive straight off the cliff knowing what the ending is, but you do it anyway.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you to then elaborate that when you say shifting goalposts, can you specify
[Amit Varma]: what you mean by that?
[Amit Varma]: What were the goalposts back then?
[Amit Varma]: And in what way have they been shifting constantly?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So think about the early days of the internet.
[Guest]: Think about Crick Info's core belief or one line mission statement or think about Rediff,
[Guest]: which I was part of.
[Guest]: The idea was very simply this, that there is an entire audience, connected audience
[Guest]: outside of India, who have very little access to information on India, and who want that
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: It is not just the Indians living abroad, but also people in the US and elsewhere across
[Guest]: Europe and stuff like that, who were curious about the so called new India that was emerging.
[Guest]: And who had I mean, the only option was you wait for the newspapers to be airlifted and
[Guest]: buy it two days later.
[Guest]: So your one line mission statement was, what is happening in India right here right now.
[Guest]: Keep people informed.
[Guest]: It was a fact based storytelling.
[Guest]: It looked at the major stories of the day, it looked at why it was important, and you
[Guest]: just had to worry about informing people.
[Guest]: Even when the paradigm changed, and the Indian audience started growing in numbers, there
[Guest]: was still that comfort zone of all you told yourself was, for the Indian audience, you
[Guest]: need to take them beyond the papers that they read with their morning coffee.
[Guest]: And you need to bring them up to speed on all that has happened so far and also look
[Guest]: at yesterday's news and elaborate, give them context, give them nuance and stuff like that.
[Guest]: These are goalposts that as journalists, we are trained to identify and to meet.
[Guest]: What happened subsequently is as there was this initial efflorescence of sites coming
[Guest]: on to the web, and it has a very low entry threshold.
[Guest]: At some point, the Excel jockeys came into the picture, and what they started focusing
[Guest]: on was page views and unique users and you know, all of that.
[Guest]: If you remember that sequence, initially, we were all told to chase page views.
[Guest]: And we started gaming the system.
[Amit Varma]: We both know how...
[Amit Varma]: Especially with the disgusting pagination that a lot of the sites had.
[Guest]: Pagination was one.
[Guest]: We took a PTI report, which was about 300 words and split it into 10 slides.
[Guest]: That was one.
[Guest]: We architected our pages in such a way that one page view was actually 10 different page
[Guest]: views because we loaded various elements separately.
[Guest]: That was another way that we gamed the system.
[Guest]: We started this whole slideshow business simply in order to garner page views.
[Guest]: And so we started chasing page views.
[Guest]: At no point did we step back and say, wait, why are we chasing these page views?
[Guest]: How is this going to translate either into journalistic sense or even into economic sense?
[Guest]: What are we going to do with the page views?
[Amit Varma]: Nobody knew that.
[Amit Varma]: It's not improving the user experience, but making it worse in the long run that cannot
[Amit Varma]: work.
[Amit Varma]: It cannot work.
[Guest]: So at some point, we actually discovered that it wasn't working.
[Guest]: The readers were unhappy over the fact that they can see gaming when they experience it.
[Guest]: And the advertisers said, look, I mean, you guys are just generating page views.
[Guest]: It means nothing to us.
[Guest]: So then it became unique users.
[Guest]: How do we find audiences?
[Guest]: Now it's become time spent.
[Guest]: And every time we find that a metric that has been identified by the number crunchers,
[Guest]: we chase it for an endless period of time.
[Guest]: And then we find that it makes no sense whatsoever.
[Guest]: And then somebody comes up with this bright idea of chasing another metric.
[Guest]: And ultimately, we have moved from being journalists to being Excel jockeys, who our first job
[Guest]: in the morning, literally, and I know this from both the last days that I was in Rediff
[Guest]: and also after working in Yahoo.
[Guest]: The first thing I had to do was look at the numbers of the previous 24 hours and see,
[Guest]: did we meet our targets?
[Guest]: Journalism is not about meeting targets.
[Guest]: It's about informing people.
[Guest]: And somehow we have shifted from a core purpose, the purpose for which we got into this profession,
[Guest]: the purpose for which we are trained.
[Guest]: And we've gotten into something that A, we don't know how to do, B, we don't know why
[Guest]: we're doing it.
[Guest]: And C, we don't know what the end goal is.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, back in the day, it was sort of different because
[Amit Varma]: the way the broadsheet economy worked was that like, if you got the Times of India every
[Amit Varma]: morning at home, it just came by itself.
[Amit Varma]: It isn't that you had to attract the reader every day.
[Amit Varma]: It was going to him, you had the reader, he was a captive audience.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, everything was bundled together.
[Amit Varma]: So even if you read only the sports pages, you're still getting the whole paper.
[Amit Varma]: While today, what has happened is that, you know, a guy is not going to a website necessarily
[Amit Varma]: by default.
[Amit Varma]: Often, a lot of people consume news only through social media and following Facebook links
[Amit Varma]: and Twitter links, which therefore gain that much in importance and clickbait becomes important.
[Amit Varma]: How do you make someone click there?
[Amit Varma]: And also, you've sort of compartmentalized everything down to the level of the individual
[Amit Varma]: article.
[Amit Varma]: And that whole concept of a bundled offering is really not there to that extent.
[Amit Varma]: And I wouldn't even argue that's a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: In some ways, it's a good thing, because it empowers the readers, it empowers producers
[Amit Varma]: of news.
[Amit Varma]: But it also changes the way journalism is done, because it shifts the focus of the journalist
[Amit Varma]: from just doing a consistent good job in creating quality journalism to actually just trying
[Amit Varma]: to get clicks, which can result in going for the lowest common denominator.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: But to slightly disagree with your point about it's not necessarily a bad thing that the
[Guest]: bundling of news no longer exists.
[Guest]: Consider what is happening today.
[Guest]: Somebody either because he saw a link on social media or whatever, clicks on a story, which
[Guest]: could be carried by the Hindustan Times or Times of India or whatever it is.
[Guest]: He sees that story in isolation.
[Guest]: And he promptly reacts to that story.
[Guest]: We get the usual stuff about this is biased, this is slanted, this is done by a prostitute.
[Guest]: But we both worked in newspapers, we know how we put a newspaper together, there is
[Guest]: a cohesion from the news that we carry top of the page on the first page, all the way
[Guest]: through to the op-ed pages.
[Guest]: There is a sequential thinking that goes into the choices that we make about what we're
[Guest]: carrying and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So there is a context to why we think this news is important.
[Guest]: There is an explanation of why this is important.
[Guest]: Here we're seeing, as you as you pointed out, we're seeing bits of news in isolation from
[Guest]: multiple sources.
[Amit Varma]: There is no overall context.
[Amit Varma]: But I think, I mean, I've never worked in a broadsheet newspaper, I've written columns
[Amit Varma]: for many of them.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things I've noted, and correct me if I'm wrong, is that they work in silos
[Amit Varma]: anyways.
[Guest]: So the pages don't communicate with each other.
[Guest]: But what I also do remember from working in broadsheets, and I did, was that there was
[Guest]: always the editor and the managing editor who had the spreadsheet of the 26, I mean,
[Guest]: 24 or 28 or whatever number of pages it was.
[Guest]: And there was a constant filling in of these things and the shuffling around of things
[Guest]: as and you know how news happens as the day progresses, things, the priorities change.
[Guest]: And there was constantly a track on how these shifting priorities were impacting other sections
[Guest]: of the paper.
[Guest]: There was a uniformity of thought.
[Guest]: Now what you have is an editorial newsroom where the emphasis is simply on, we live in
[Guest]: the age of the internet, we cannot afford to be to be seen as dated, therefore, something
[Guest]: has to keep going up every couple of minutes, otherwise, we look stagnant.
[Guest]: And we'll drive away the audience and that is where you get the kind of batched stuff
[Guest]: like breaking news, Rajnath Singh to hold a press conference.
[Guest]: I mean, the press conference may or may not lead to news, but the fact that he's going
[Guest]: to address the media is hardly news, forget about breaking news.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, I'm just, you know, just thinking aloud here, it's led from one kind of tyranny
[Amit Varma]: to another.
[Amit Varma]: Earlier, you had the tyranny of the news cycle, where, you know, if something broke today,
[Amit Varma]: people would know about it only the next day.
[Amit Varma]: And an opinion piece would probably happen the day after that, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And you were dependent on the news cycle, and internet publishing, and especially putting
[Amit Varma]: the tools of publishing in the hands of anybody, which was a great thing in many ways, enabled
[Amit Varma]: you to break past the tyranny of the news cycle in the sense that, you know, when after
[Amit Varma]: the 2003 tsunami, when I was going down the coast of Tamil Nadu, you know, I was practically
[Amit Varma]: live blogging from there, I didn't have to wait to submit something to a paper, I didn't
[Amit Varma]: have to write something which fit a particular format of a 700 word piece or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But we move from that tyranny, the tyranny of the news cycle to the tyranny of the immediate,
[Amit Varma]: where there is this hunger, like you just said, of just getting things out there to
[Amit Varma]: just keep getting clips, keep getting clicks, you know, just...
[Guest]: Yeah, it's true.
[Guest]: And it has its good side, which is that, like you pointed out with your blog during the
[Guest]: tsunami, or the kind of work that was done online and on social media during the Chennai
[Guest]: floods of a couple of years back, or 26-11, if you want to go even further back in time.
[Guest]: Or even the Bombay cloudburst, you know, the kind of work that Peter Griffin did, for example,
[Guest]: our friend.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: What that permitted us to do is information that needed to get to people, got to them
[Guest]: in time, not the next day, nobody had to wait for the next day to find out which areas were
[Guest]: stressed and what the problem was and stuff like that.
[Guest]: But the problem is that these kind of events that require immediacy, and both detail and,
[Guest]: you know, to use, say, the favourite phrase of Gideon, a mile wide and inch deep coverage,
[Guest]: it was logical, that is what is required.
[Guest]: But here the tyranny really is that it is expected on a daily, hourly basis.
[Guest]: And there is nothing happening that demands it.
[Guest]: So you manufacture stuff, just to fill that need or that, you know, to feed the beast
[Amit Varma]: of immediacy.
[Guest]: Boy falls into a well.
[Guest]: Yeah, boy falls into a well, boy fell into a well, it's okay.
[Guest]: I mean, Radhnath Singh leaves home to reach the press conference is a bit of a reach,
[Guest]: you know, like, I mean, let's not.
[Guest]: And in the process, what we have done is we've undercut ourselves, because we have trivialised
[Guest]: news to such an extent that the audience is pissed off, and that is in turn translating
[Guest]: or reflecting back on us.
[Guest]: Credibility is short to bits.
[Guest]: I mean, if I were to write a piece saying that Radhnath Singh is going to hold a press
[Guest]: conference this afternoon, I wouldn't expect anybody to read me much after that.
[Amit Varma]: And also what happens is that when you sensationalise the trivial, nothing can be sensational anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, we become numb and inured.
[Amit Varma]: You see something, someone shouting on TV, you don't pay attention because people are
[Guest]: shouting on TV all the time.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: And also, I mean, a book that I know that you've read, Boorstin talked about this in
[Guest]: 1961, when he talked in the book, The Image, he talked about the fact that the media, which
[Guest]: desperately needs events to play up, has started being complicit in and now actively engaged
[Guest]: in creating pseudo events, which was the phrase that he used for it, simply in order to find
[Guest]: stuff to fill up its pages.
[Guest]: He was talking at a time when there was just cable television and print.
[Guest]: And now you have the internet, which is a far hungrier and far more gigantic beast.
[Guest]: So this entire thing has escalated to a process where nobody in a media house, starting with
[Guest]: the CEO, all the way down to the trainee journalist who joined yesterday, has any idea why we're
[Guest]: doing the things we're doing and what the end goal is.
[Guest]: And the economy of the media is stressed.
[Guest]: We all know that.
[Guest]: We know we're heading for a disaster.
[Guest]: We don't know how to, how to just reverse the car and drive back down the cliff.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then be fair to say that mainstream journalism has moved from news gathering and
[Amit Varma]: putting together opinion to event management?
[Amit Varma]: And by event, I don't merely mean that you manufacture a fake event and report it, but
[Amit Varma]: that you build a narrative around every damn thing because and you build as sensational
[Amit Varma]: a narrative as you can, and that is the event per se.
[Amit Varma]: And your whole time goes into sort of building those pseudo events, those pseudo narratives,
[Amit Varma]: so to say.
[Guest]: So you can just keep pumping the sensation.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Because, I mean, to cite a recent instance, when you were there at the Bangalore Lit Fest,
[Guest]: so was I, right?
[Guest]: I was doing a panel that had Rahul Dravid on it.
[Guest]: Rahul Dravid, as you know, rarely speaks in public.
[Guest]: He's gun shy of, you know, conversation, but he agreed to come for this.
[Guest]: And he was brilliantly articulate.
[Guest]: He spoke with a lot of nuance and a lot of depth and detail and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And then next day, I was looking at the coverage in the newspapers, and they picked out this
[Guest]: one sentence that Rahul said in a wider context, and that became 800 word stories.
[Amit Varma]: Because it gave the headline.
[Guest]: It gave the headline and the headline gave you an opportunity to rant.
[Guest]: And all, even the context that Rahul meticulously supplied, because it did not fit into the
[Guest]: narrative, because it would have desensationalized what he had said in the first place, was conveniently
[Guest]: ignored.
[Guest]: The people who wrote about it in some veteran writers just decided that that was not relevant.
[Guest]: So yeah, you're right, we, today, if we are putting up something, we first think of the
[Guest]: headline and we think of whether this headline is going to attract people to click on this
[Guest]: thing, and will it play on social media?
[Guest]: And how can we sharpen it and stuff like that, instead of thinking of is this first question
[Guest]: that we used to ask ourselves in the newsroom?
[Guest]: Is this even worth writing about?
[Amit Varma]: That question has been forgotten.
[Amit Varma]: So is this partly, like, the journalist there is a good friend of mine and a veteran reporter,
[Amit Varma]: and I admire his work.
[Amit Varma]: And I think some of the blame here might also then have to go to audiences which have a
[Amit Varma]: short attention span, and they're craving the sensationalism, and they don't have the
[Amit Varma]: appetite for nuance and detail.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, reporters who are catering to that marketplace, therefore find themselves
[Amit Varma]: forced to go down those same roads, where they'll watch an event, and they don't really
[Amit Varma]: care what the broader points being made are, or they don't want to go too deep, their brain
[Amit Varma]: is just on the lookout for headline.
[Guest]: But two things to that, one is, I might be catering to a perceived need.
[Guest]: But at what point do I, as a sentient human being, ask myself, am I committing suicide
[Guest]: here?
[Guest]: At some point, I would assume that either as an individual or as an organization, you
[Guest]: really need to think about that thing.
[Guest]: The larger point is, again, to refer to that particular episode, the work, something like
[Guest]: 500 to 600 people attending that particular session, and sitting on stage, what struck
[Guest]: me was the the kind of applause that Rahul was getting, when he actually provided nuance
[Guest]: and context.
[Guest]: For instance, he was asked, I asked him, why don't you write a book?
[Guest]: And he said, Look, if I'm writing something, it has to be honest, there are some things
[Guest]: that I cannot talk about, and therefore, I'd far rather not write.
[Guest]: It got applause, it is not a headline.
[Amit Varma]: But it was exactly the kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And we could argue it's there's a bit of a selection bias there, because a sort of audience
[Amit Varma]: which would turn up to a lit fest would obviously be a little more demanding.
[Guest]: Fair enough.
[Guest]: But then are we chasing the wrong audience?
[Guest]: Look, I can understand this entire clickbait, headlining and all the rest of it, if it was
[Guest]: translating into at least an economic goal.
[Guest]: Let's face it.
[Guest]: I mean, the days of the philanthropic publisher no longer exist.
[Guest]: Media is a business, it has to be, it has to survive on its own ability to make money.
[Guest]: Now, if you're saying that all of this work that you're doing is resulting in a good bottom
[Guest]: line and a healthy bottom line, then I can swallow my reservations and say, okay, fine,
[Guest]: you know, at least for the sake of survival and for thriving, you need to do and maybe
[Guest]: we'll subsidize some good journalism with this precisely.
[Guest]: But what is actually happening?
[Guest]: No media houses making money, every single one is stressed, they're trying all sorts
[Guest]: of things, including now, for instance, your money making opportunities have become to
[Guest]: cite one example, external event management.
[Guest]: You have the conclaves and the thing and all that, and that in turn puts you at the mercy
[Guest]: of the headliners you need.
[Guest]: One instance, if you remember, the Times of India was about to do a major headline event,
[Guest]: which had both Narendra Modi and Amit Shah headlining it.
[Guest]: Two days before that, Vineet Jain posts something that is vaguely disrespectful, let's say of
[Guest]: demonetization, or one of those things.
[Guest]: And the next thing you know, both the headliners wait till the last minute and then pull out
[Guest]: and put the event at risk.
[Guest]: What happens and and imagine now the pressure on the Times of India management, they know
[Guest]: that their bottom line is their bottom line is at risk, right?
[Guest]: So the more you chase after something that you cannot monetize, the more you are at the
[Guest]: mercy of people who will then come and bail you out.
[Guest]: And so now you've added an external stress point to this entire thing, and you have not
[Guest]: gained anything, which is what I keep going back to, I'll, I'll swallow my objections
[Guest]: about clickbait, I'll swallow my reservations about some of this sensational journalism.
[Guest]: And frankly, I mean, we've all been guilty of it at some point or the other, we've hyped
[Guest]: things and we've, you know, exaggerated all my posts about cows, your posts about cows,
[Guest]: my posts about maybe some fairly ordinary tests in retrospect, which at that time, for
[Guest]: me, I mean, I was right in the middle of it.
[Guest]: And I thought it was the greatest thing that ever been seen.
[Guest]: All of that would at least be palatable.
[Guest]: If at the end of the day, like you said, there was some money coming into the equation and
[Guest]: that money could then fund some good journalism.
[Guest]: But look at the cycle that we're on a website is started, there is a flurry of excitement,
[Guest]: they say that they have backers and they have this, that and the other, they hire a lot
[Guest]: of journalists.
[Guest]: The journalists are put on the job of churning out content at incredible rapidity.
[Guest]: A good writer who takes time to marinate and to come up with a thoughtful take on something
[Guest]: is actually told, no, we need five posts from you plus we need 10 social media interventions
[Guest]: plus we need 10 other things.
[Guest]: The guy has no time to think.
[Guest]: He writes the most obvious, which is by definition, what is most obvious to the audience, either
[Guest]: you're not giving them anything new.
[Guest]: You chase this metric.
[Guest]: End of the day, you find you're not making money.
[Guest]: Two years down the line, the next wave starts, which is layoffs.
[Guest]: All the journalists are back out in the field looking for jobs, which don't exist, by the
[Guest]: way, and lesser staff doing more work.
[Guest]: So your quality deteriorates.
[Guest]: And you see that playing out in website after website after website today.
[Amit Varma]: So that is my question.
[Amit Varma]: If no one in the media is making money, is it possible for the media to be making money?
[Amit Varma]: Do people really care about it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, let me again draw a contrast between how we consume news in the eighties
[Amit Varma]: and nineties and how we do it today.
[Amit Varma]: Then you were a captive audience, you got whatever newspapers you got, you had whatever
[Amit Varma]: channels you had and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And also, and I'll come back to this later, it's a separate thread, but there was a broad
[Amit Varma]: consensus on the facts.
[Amit Varma]: You might say that papers had this bias or that bias or whatever, but broadly, more or
[Amit Varma]: less, everybody agreed what the world was like, and there were no deep disagreements
[Amit Varma]: with that, which is a separate point I want to come back to later.
[Amit Varma]: But what we sort of have today is that not only a media sources and the way people get
[Amit Varma]: their information and entertainment and knowledge of which media is only a small part, a very
[Amit Varma]: fragmented.
[Amit Varma]: So are people's attention spans.
[Amit Varma]: There is a sort of a lot fighting for your attention.
[Amit Varma]: And are we at a transitional phase where the media as it is, does not resemble the media
[Amit Varma]: which would optimally exist if it were catering to people's preferences?
[Guest]: So here's the thing.
[Guest]: Every single time this conversation comes up, we treat it as a binary, we say, then
[Guest]: people read, today people don't read.
[Guest]: But then you're the editor of a site that concentrates on depth and detail and nuance.
[Guest]: And you know that it's not that you don't have an audience, it is that your audience
[Guest]: cannot be measured in the hundreds of millions.
[Guest]: It can be measured in the hundreds of thousands.
[Guest]: But that is equally important.
[Amit Varma]: These hundreds of thousands of people who want nuance.
[Amit Varma]: It's a long tail.
[Amit Varma]: And in India, every niche is a big niche.
[Guest]: So not to be scoffed at.
[Guest]: So if the focus was on that, and if the awareness was that, look, there is an audience that
[Guest]: does clickbait, and there is an audience that wants depth and detail, then you can find
[Guest]: that sweet spot that you're referring to.
[Guest]: And it may not necessarily be one at the expense of the other.
[Amit Varma]: My point is that no one's making money.
[Guest]: So aren't we all getting it wrong?
[Guest]: So the moneymaking part of it is the other part.
[Guest]: If your focus is entirely on page views and audience acquisition, you haven't found a
[Guest]: way of monetizing that audience for one fundamental reason.
[Guest]: The audience is shifting from print to online, there is almost a zero, you know, disagreement
[Guest]: about that fact.
[Guest]: Print at least in the English thing is stagnant or slipping.
[Guest]: The audience increasing online, however, has not been matched by a corresponding movement
[Guest]: of your advertising dollars, right?
[Guest]: And on the internet, additional tripwire is that of the advertising dollars that are flowing
[Guest]: to the internet, your lunch is basically being eaten by Google and Facebook, which in the
[Guest]: advanced markets account for 70% of all the advertising dollars that are being spent.
[Guest]: That is true of the UK, that is true of the US.
[Guest]: So your big source of your big platforms are basically not merely your platforms, they
[Guest]: are cannibals that are taking away your revenue.
[Guest]: So increasingly, more and more sites are fighting for less and less share of a very small pie
[Guest]: to begin with.
[Guest]: Can you make money?
[Guest]: Yes, because one of the things that the media has forgotten, or the media probably never
[Guest]: knew in the first place, because there used to be this Chinese wall between those who
[Guest]: wanted to sponsor content and the creators of that content.
[Guest]: And there was a reason for that wall to be in existence.
[Guest]: But my argument is that it's probably time to break through that wall if you're not going
[Guest]: to find philanthropic supporters of the media, people who have money and say, look, it is
[Guest]: in my interest and in the country's interest for there to be a good independent media source
[Guest]: and I will back it, which animal clearly does not exist today.
[Guest]: Then you need to start thinking elsewhere and you need to start saying, look, there
[Guest]: are brands that are happy to spend money on creating content.
[Guest]: Now if I create content that is very obviously advertorial content, it's not going to work.
[Guest]: But if I create, if I use the brand's money to create content that will be enriching for
[Guest]: the audience, then there's no reason why this won't work.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, look, that's sort of another name for sponsorship, in a sense, or advertising.
[Guest]: But news has always been sponsored.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm saying it's that's not really a new concept per se.
[Guest]: It isn't.
[Guest]: But it's a concept that hasn't been explored is my point.
[Guest]: It has not been explored to the extent that it is possible to explore.
[Guest]: Look, I mean, your ideas are your IPR and I keep getting accused of giving them away.
[Guest]: So I'll do that one more time.
[Guest]: So we keep talking of this new India.
[Guest]: What do we know of this new India?
[Guest]: I mean, you drove through the tsunami affected areas.
[Guest]: You must have realized and one of the big learnings for you at that time and from what
[Guest]: I remember of your blog, you were constantly struck by the things you were seeing that
[Guest]: you didn't know, even the things that should have been obvious.
[Amit Varma]: The things that were unknown, unknowns for me, really, I had no idea they could exist.
[Guest]: Precisely.
[Guest]: And imagine that on an all India scale, right?
[Guest]: So why don't we have something called, let's say the rediscovery of India, where what we're
[Guest]: doing is putting four cars in the four corners of the country, we're staffing them with people
[Guest]: who can see and who can absorb and who can listen and let them meander through the country.
[Guest]: Let them blog as they go.
[Guest]: Let there be a photographer slash videographer who's also telling visual stories, taking
[Guest]: you there, showing you what's going on.
[Guest]: And let them take six months exploring this India and creating an online archive of what
[Guest]: this new India is like.
[Guest]: I'm not saying just look at the major tourist attractions.
[Guest]: I'm saying look at what is happening on the ground, good, bad and indifferent.
[Guest]: Record that.
[Guest]: Now you have a project that you can take to an automotive manufacturer for sponsorship.
[Guest]: You can take it to a smartphone manufacturer because nowadays nobody bothers about whether
[Guest]: the phone can make and receive calls and messages.
[Guest]: It's always about the visual ability, the photographs and the videos and stuff.
[Guest]: You can go to the tourism ministry because you're covering the whole of the country.
[Guest]: You can go to the hospitality industry because these guys are occasionally going to be thing
[Guest]: and you have natural sponsors, multiple sponsors for something like this.
[Guest]: And it is compelling content.
[Guest]: It is sticky content and it enhances any media house in this country that you can think about.
[Guest]: But here's the irony.
[Guest]: I first proposed this to Yahoo on January 10, 2010.
[Guest]: I've since talked about it to at least three other editors and to two major branding houses.
[Guest]: Nobody has even touched this.
[Amit Varma]: And I can sort of imagine why, because while this is something that I would follow avidly
[Amit Varma]: and read avidly, it still seems somewhat niche to me to begin with, and especially in these
[Amit Varma]: days where you look at the kind of content people are consuming and there's nothing sensational
[Amit Varma]: about this.
[Amit Varma]: This is something that as a reader or a consumer, you have to immerse yourself in.
[Amit Varma]: But going back to your earlier point about, you know, where is the money?
[Amit Varma]: It seems to me that the industry is ripe for disruption and I don't know where it's going
[Amit Varma]: to come from.
[Amit Varma]: For the simple reason that everyone who spends time reading a news article online is actually
[Amit Varma]: spending money because time is money.
[Amit Varma]: There is an opportunity cost to that and they are spending their time voluntarily and willingly
[Amit Varma]: and they would probably not mind even paying.
[Amit Varma]: But where is a mechanism to capture that is a question and advertising therefore seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be a really clumsy tool to transfer some of the money that the reader is willing
[Amit Varma]: to pay for a piece that he values reading.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, I know that Ken is doing a very interesting subscription kind of effort, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and they're a good magazine and I hope it works out.
[Amit Varma]: But there is something missing here in the marketplace, which some genius really needs
[Guest]: to come out.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And what is missing is the last mile thinking.
[Guest]: Earlier we talked about how the chase for page views became the chase for unique users.
[Guest]: And all of these come from the brands.
[Guest]: They come from the sponsors.
[Guest]: The sponsors are the ones who said at some point, we're no longer interested in page
[Guest]: views.
[Guest]: We want to know how many readers you have, how many unique users you have.
[Guest]: The same sponsors then came back and said, we're not even interested in the number of
[Guest]: users.
[Guest]: We want to know how much time an individual user spends on your site.
[Guest]: Because like you said, time is money.
[Guest]: Somebody is investing his time on the site.
[Guest]: The longer he spends there, the more of an opportunity I have to sell him something was
[Guest]: the thinking.
[Guest]: But they haven't figured out how to convert my ability to attract a reader and hold a
[Guest]: reader to his ability to sell him something when that's going on.
[Guest]: And that is because even though the sponsors are still thinking in terms of conventional
[Guest]: branding, put a logo and a short message, at best get a click through to some fulfillment
[Guest]: site and stuff like that, which might work for an Amazon, because it is about fulfillment.
[Guest]: It's immediate.
[Guest]: It's instinctive.
[Guest]: So you can have those kinds of sites doing that.
[Guest]: But for the broad mass of advertisers, the last mile thinking still remains missing.
[Amit Varma]: I think this economic puzzle is something that you and I are probably too old to figure
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: It'll need some real innovator thinker to come out and disrupt that.
[Amit Varma]: I want to, you know, shift the subject to the nature of media itself.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, like I mentioned earlier, back in the day, every the mainstream media
[Amit Varma]: was a gatekeeper of information and news.
[Amit Varma]: That's where you got it all from.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe they were biased once in a while and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly, there was a consensus on what the facts are.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a consensus on what the world is like.
[Amit Varma]: Now I want to refer back to another book, which I know is a favorite of yours and has
[Amit Varma]: been a deep influence on me, Walter Lipman's Public Opinion, which was published in 1922.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd really urge all the listeners of the show, if they care about the subject, to read
[Amit Varma]: that book.
[Amit Varma]: And it's published in 1922.
[Amit Varma]: The first chapter of the book is called, if I remember correctly, the world as it is in
[Amit Varma]: the world inside our heads.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes a very valuable point that the world as it is, is a beast that no one really
[Amit Varma]: knows.
[Amit Varma]: We just carry a world inside our heads, and because of media, the world inside our heads,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, when you had all your information filtered through mainstream media, you went
[Amit Varma]: through the same education system, the world inside everyone's head was very, very similar.
[Amit Varma]: And what has happened now with the internet, and which I think is a huge net positive and
[Amit Varma]: a great empowering effect.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not criticizing it and don't get me wrong, but what has happened now is that on
[Amit Varma]: the internet, discourse has become very polarized, and it's become possible to find all kinds
[Amit Varma]: of people you could not have for geographical reasons, who might share your worldviews,
[Amit Varma]: or your fetishes, or your love for conspiracy theories, or your proclivities or inclinations,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore then form echo chambers, where people share broadly the same worldview, but
[Amit Varma]: they're impervious to anything that challenges that.
[Amit Varma]: And as discourse gets more and more polarized, you have an ecosystem of these echo chambers,
[Amit Varma]: and it's incredibly hard to break through them.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a confirmation bias in play, they will believe what they want to believe, they
[Amit Varma]: will consume what feeds into their existing preferences.
[Amit Varma]: And what that's done is that it's dispersed the number of sources of news and information,
[Amit Varma]: like I would argue that WhatsApp today with this million dispersed content creators is
[Amit Varma]: way more influential than any broadsheet could possibly be.
[Amit Varma]: And then the question then comes is that in this environment, what is journalism?
[Guest]: So you're totally bang on about calling WhatsApp the strongest possible vector for the spread
[Guest]: of information, which also includes misinformation, deliberate disinformation, the whole lot,
[Guest]: which which then puts an added burden on journalism, because how the hell do you combat that?
[Guest]: There is no intersect between the media, I mean, you or I could start a WhatsApp group,
[Guest]: but then again, fairly soon, what will happen is it will fill with like minded people.
[Guest]: It will be a bubble of our own what purpose, it doesn't serve a purpose.
[Guest]: But here's the deal, though, if you look at the last three and a half years, and I refer
[Guest]: to this, because I recently wrote a piece arguing this precise case, we now are talking
[Guest]: about how is the narrative changing?
[Guest]: Look, WhatsApp groups have only grown in size, the groups that are fanboys, for instance,
[Guest]: of the present regime have proliferated, all of that is moving in one direction.
[Guest]: And yet, people have started even within those groups started perceiving a certain dissonance,
[Guest]: a certain criticism of the government that they're no longer able to refute.
[Guest]: You can see signs of that, for instance, in the decrease in actual trolling, because somebody
[Guest]: or the others figured out at the establishment level that this is actually now proving counterproductive.
[Guest]: You can see that in people who earlier just dismissed you now reaching out and saying,
[Guest]: can you talk about that a little bit more?
[Guest]: Because that doesn't compute with what I have in my head.
[Guest]: The thing that has happened is because of one or two important events that have led
[Guest]: to pointed nuanced criticism, a little bit of this bubble is breaking, or at least there
[Guest]: is a slight drip drip of fact and information into these little bubbles.
[Guest]: Our problem is that if we are looking for an instant solution, it's not going to happen.
[Guest]: All that has happened is that it has put journalism in this place where against the odds, against
[Guest]: the run of both economics and what is called media management, good sense, we are having
[Guest]: to fight harder and harder to create the sort of impact we could create much more easily
[Guest]: a decade ago, a couple of decades ago.
[Guest]: So the point is not that we cannot break through.
[Guest]: The point is that it has become an incredibly arduous process.
[Guest]: And that has put an additional stress on newsrooms, which neither have the ability, the resources
[Guest]: or the appetite for that kind of ongoing struggle.
[Guest]: I mean, I'll turn the question right back to you.
[Guest]: Why would you do a Pragati?
[Guest]: It is basically an attempt.
[Guest]: If it is to create a bubble, I'm sure that, you know, none of the people, none of you
[Guest]: guys who are involved in it, and I know you all, would even be attempting this because
[Guest]: how easy is it for us to create a bubble if we won't, why take all this trouble?
[Guest]: What we're doing now is trying to get across, trying to break past the binaries that now
[Guest]: govern our thinking and try and find a middle ground of just get back to fact, get back
[Guest]: to proper analysis.
[Guest]: And hopefully the trickle down effect will, I mean, we will attract the fence sitters
[Guest]: and it's constantly forgotten in this media binary that ultimately the largest audience
[Guest]: is those guys in the middle, who are neither this way nor that.
[Guest]: These two bubbles are fine.
[Guest]: They're going to exist and they've existed pretty much as long as there has been a media.
[Amit Varma]: I think there are multiple bubbles, not just two.
[Amit Varma]: And I think, you know, Pragati, of course, to briefly address that was set up because
[Amit Varma]: the discourse was so polarized and we thought we should create a bipartisan site which does
[Amit Varma]: dispassionate analysis of public policy without either attacking or supporting parties or
[Amit Varma]: people.
[Amit Varma]: My impassioned editorials are a different matter, but broadly all our other content
[Amit Varma]: is, looks at policy dispassionately and tries to speak to everyone without compromising
[Amit Varma]: anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, to get back to the kind of positive feedback where you now say the tide
[Amit Varma]: might be turning, I'd say that one, I mean, I hate to be cynical about this, but I'd say
[Amit Varma]: that one, the people we know, it's a very self-selected kind of group and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in purely economic terms, I'd look more at revealed preferences.
[Amit Varma]: How do people actually act?
[Amit Varma]: And the UP election was actually an eye opener for me because demonetization was devastated
[Amit Varma]: the economy.
[Amit Varma]: We all know that there is no disputing that now, despite the efforts of useful idiots
[Amit Varma]: in various places, it devastated the economy.
[Amit Varma]: And yet many people in UP itself, many people who lost jobs, whose businesses shut down,
[Amit Varma]: who were deeply hurt by it, nevertheless voted for Modi ji.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore there was a disconnect between, to use Lipman's phrases, the world as it is
[Amit Varma]: and the world in our heads, where what happens in the real world may not really matter.
[Amit Varma]: You may be one of those 1 million people who is coming into the workforce and there's no
[Amit Varma]: job for you because the economy has been mishandled so badly.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you become a Hindutva warrior fighting against Love Jihad, because that's the narrative
[Amit Varma]: that is inside your head.
[Amit Varma]: And that narrative cannot be fought through facts.
[Amit Varma]: So the problem isn't that there is fake news and we need to fight it with facts.
[Amit Varma]: The problem is that facts are incapable of fighting those kinds of narratives and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which I don't have any answers to, but how do you respond to that?
[Guest]: One of the things is, and I know you've read the book as well, and so have I, Prashant's
[Guest]: wonderful book on how the BJP's election machinery, it's a, it's a must read for political analysis
[Guest]: in general, and to understand the BJP's worldview in particular, you use the word narrative.
[Guest]: And for me, all the post-UP narrative talked about this miracle of look, Modi devastated
[Guest]: everybody's lives in practice, but he was still able to sell this whole thing of I am
[Guest]: a poor man doing it on behalf of the poor man and against the rich man.
[Guest]: He sold that whole story.
[Guest]: And it worked wonderfully well, along with all the other sub stories of Love Jihad and,
[Guest]: you know, the Muslim oppression and all of that.
[Guest]: My point is, even at that point, for the people who are actually affected and ultimately look
[Guest]: the voter is going to make up his mind on the basis of whether his life has gotten better
[Guest]: or worse.
[Guest]: He doesn't give a damn for all the macro stuff that we keep talking about and obsessing over.
[Amit Varma]: His thing is, am I living better today than I was?
[Amit Varma]: I actually disagree, even if you're living worse, you know, it's almost political ideology
[Amit Varma]: has almost become like a religion, even if the circumstances get worse, they will still
[Guest]: vote in the same way.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But my argument is, you need to allow some time between a policy and its results percolating
[Guest]: before you interpret a particular election as being influenced for or against by that
[Guest]: particular policy.
[Guest]: And UP happened too close to demonetization for there to be an alternate narrative.
[Guest]: What I'm looking forward to is the five or probably six elections that have to happen
[Guest]: between say, December of this year, and December of next year.
[Guest]: Because now you've had time for demonetization to actually play out on the ground.
[Guest]: You've had time for the buzz around this being an anti-rich move.
[Guest]: I mean, if it is an anti-rich move, where is all the wealth that's come back from black
[Guest]: money?
[Guest]: It clearly hasn't.
[Guest]: And therefore, the civil society, which should have benefited from that, because you have
[Guest]: excess money, you can pump it back into your, you know, societal interventions.
[Guest]: None of those things are materializing.
[Guest]: Now I want to see and which is why I said, yeah, I will agree with the basic premise
[Guest]: that demonetization and the UP election played out exactly the opposite of what pretty much
[Guest]: all the punditry thought it would.
[Guest]: You thought it would have a major impact, it did, but it had the impact in the opposite
[Amit Varma]: direction to what we assume.
[Guest]: If at all there is that causation, I mean, the causation correlation is not in the first
[Guest]: place 100% clear.
[Guest]: But as these serial elections play off, that would probably be a better time to step back
[Guest]: and analyze whether a narrative that is sold in the heat of the moment survives contact
[Guest]: with reality.
[Guest]: And which is why I think it is still important, despite the feeling that you're Sisyphus rolling
[Guest]: this rock constantly up the hill, you still need to keep doing this, because what is your
[Guest]: alternative?
[Guest]: Are you going to cede the ground entirely?
[Guest]: Because you're saying, look, I mean, I work from morning 8 o'clock till midnight 12, and
[Guest]: nobody listens.
[Guest]: They live in their own bubbles.
[Guest]: I agree with the concept that Lippmann wrote about and that you're talking, even in the
[Guest]: halcyon days of the media, we still lived inside our own worlds.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, that's that's human nature.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: Our worlds were very similar, though, mostly.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And as you pointed out, this was written in 1922, and it was relevant then.
[Guest]: But you also pointed out that at that point, at least the world inside our head was based
[Guest]: on a similar set of facts to the world externally, because the media, pretty much like you said,
[Guest]: there is a consensus on what fact is.
[Guest]: That consensus breaking down today is what is causing a lot of the dissonance.
[Guest]: But then I would think it is doubly imperative for the media to go right back to first principles
[Guest]: and say, important news will be fact.
[Guest]: The rest of it, the noise, the opinion, yeah, rant away for all you want.
[Guest]: And it's great fun.
[Guest]: And sometimes a well argued rant from the left or the right actually shapes your own
[Guest]: thinking.
[Guest]: But that is for, or that is not for the vast majority of people who just want to consume
[Guest]: some news, some fact and move on.
[Amit Varma]: I think the other, again, thinking aloud, the other interesting thing that strikes me
[Amit Varma]: here is that the people have their own hierarchies of facts.
[Amit Varma]: There are different kinds of facts which are in conflict with each other.
[Amit Varma]: So you might, for example, there might be the fact that, okay, GST is hard to comply
[Amit Varma]: with.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also a fact competing with the tension that, oh, there are very few jobs
[Amit Varma]: and you know, the othering of the Muslims, for example, you're competing with people
[Amit Varma]: who are not like you for the same sort of resources and in a very poor country with
[Amit Varma]: so many things, including jobs are so scarce.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a whole universe of facts in different, coming from different directions.
[Amit Varma]: And the common guy will have therefore have his hierarchy of what facts matter to him
[Amit Varma]: and what facts don't.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, does that make every journalist who claims allegiance to facts also an activist
[Amit Varma]: and a crusader of sorts, because he is necessarily propagating a foregrounding of facts according
[Amit Varma]: to his hierarchy of facts.
[Guest]: It does, but it always has.
[Guest]: I think that's, that's pretty much been how the media has always functioned.
[Guest]: So nothing much has changed over there.
[Guest]: And I still would argue that it is easier to account for bias if, as you say, the individual
[Guest]: reporter, the individual media house looked at facts and yeah, it'll look at it from its
[Guest]: filters.
[Guest]: We know, for instance, that the Indian Express will always almost invariably look at something
[Guest]: from an anti-establishment filter and the Times of India will look at it from a pro-establishment
[Amit Varma]: filter and stuff.
[Guest]: All my columns against demonetization, many of them came in the Times.
[Guest]: So there are counter-intuitive arguments on both sides.
[Guest]: There are some stories in the Indian Express that could have been written by a PR consultant,
[Guest]: for instance.
[Guest]: But broadly speaking, or at least put it this way, that we as readers assume certain stances
[Guest]: and certain biases in the media houses, and we then look for the commonalities and we
[Guest]: say, okay, these seem to be facts that pretty much everybody's agreed on and stuff like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Which still brings me back to the thing that I keep talking over and over again in J School
[Guest]: talks and when I meet friends from the media and all that, isn't that doubly important
[Guest]: then to get back to facts and cut this crap out that is not, at least I can understand
[Guest]: if it's putting money on your thing and good luck to you, it is not.
[Guest]: So what are you doing this for?
[Guest]: And to your point about people who have a predefined set of facts in their head and
[Amit Varma]: who are unwilling to break past.
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't say predefined set of facts, I'd say a hierarchy of facts.
[Amit Varma]: Some facts matter more than others.
[Amit Varma]: So to someone, it may matter more that, you know, that Muslims in his neighborhood are
[Amit Varma]: marrying Hindu girls, and that may matter more to him than, for example, how the economy
[Amit Varma]: is doing.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm simplifying massively, because it's like far more complex than that, but people
[Amit Varma]: live within their own social realities.
[Amit Varma]: And some facts may matter more than other facts.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, sometimes I worry that when, you know, we talk against coercion and imposition,
[Amit Varma]: for example, I mean, you're not a libertarian like me, but those things, we can agree on
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Both of us are against coercion and imposition.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, we try to impose these values of, you know, imposition being a bad
[Amit Varma]: thing on society at large, which is, you know, almost like a paradox.
[Amit Varma]: But anyway, that's leaving that aside.
[Guest]: No, I just, the point that you started this, I was thinking of a personal anecdote, when
[Guest]: I got back to writing about politics, and that pretty much was after Gauri Lankesh,
[Guest]: when I realized that not enough people were openly speaking out, I'm not saying you should
[Guest]: take a take up a sword and start, you know, chopping up the right wing, but at least address
[Guest]: the issues of the day and stuff like which is when I started writing again on politics,
[Guest]: particularly on my blog.
[Guest]: And then I would probably put a link on my Twitter stream.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, a few of those links are beneath the page of this podcast episode.
[Guest]: So please do follow them and check them out.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: And one of the funny things that happened was, I had this constant pushback, both on
[Guest]: Twitter and on my blog, and a couple of comments saying, yeah, you talk about all this.
[Guest]: But let's see you talk about you know, how your home state of Kerala has become a killing
[Guest]: ground and Hindus are being massacred in large numbers and stuff.
[Guest]: Now, like any other consumer of news, I had seen these headline stories of BJP worker
[Guest]: hacked to death and Arun Jaitley is visiting this that and the other and it occurred to
[Guest]: me, that I hadn't tried to see what the dots were forget about connecting them.
[Guest]: All I did was a basic Google search for the last 10 years.
[Guest]: And I just listed all the incidents that were recorded, both in the Malayalam press and
[Guest]: in the English press of killings.
[Guest]: And then I found an India spend article which showed that the killings matched each other.
[Guest]: There's one dead CPM worker for every dead BJP worker.
[Guest]: So it is not a case of one party doing the killing and the other party just being the
[Guest]: killed.
[Guest]: All I did was just list this particular thing saying, look, enough people are talking about
[Guest]: the BJP being the ones killed.
[Guest]: Here is a list of all the violence that happened in the last two years against CPM members.
[Guest]: The same guy who accused me of completely ignoring the Kerala thing, he, the first comment
[Guest]: that he posted on that blog, and later on Twitter, because I didn't respond to the blog
[Guest]: comment, I didn't see it was, can you tell me how you found these facts?
[Guest]: Because I didn't think of it this way.
[Guest]: It took a hell of a long time to put that together.
[Guest]: But one mind change somewhere.
[Guest]: And that's kind of the job of the media.
[Guest]: And if one mind is, it's not even that the mind is changed, but at least he is not thinking
[Guest]: in that one set fashion anymore.
[Guest]: I would take that as a win.
[Amit Varma]: I would take that as worth the three or four hours.
[Amit Varma]: I just ignore all water bowlery, because my sense is that, you know, focus on the argument,
[Guest]: don't shift the attention to the person.
[Guest]: But in this case, I mean, the reason why I followed it, because it raised the question
[Amit Varma]: in my own head, not about whether I was ignoring things that related to my home.
[Amit Varma]: Is he right?
[Amit Varma]: Does he have a point?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: What was exactly happening?
[Guest]: And that worked.
[Guest]: So somewhere along the way, I think, if we say that there is a dissonance in the audience
[Guest]: about what is fact anymore, then I think it is doubly important for us to then identify
[Unknown]: that, yeah, to identify that fact and put it up in a way that you can't dispute.
[Amit Varma]: And just do the best we can.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I always worry about this sense of, you know, journalism as a calling with its
[Amit Varma]: own values and so on that both of us have and journalism as a profession and it's part
[Amit Varma]: of a business and it needs to make a profit and, you know, and that conflict is always
[Guest]: something we try to navigate in our own ways.
[Guest]: Actually, I've never felt that conflict for me.
[Guest]: I mean, journalism is something that I want to do, because I love meeting people, I love
[Guest]: understanding what's going on and I love writing about it.
[Guest]: But it's also a profession I'm in because I know that I've made a good living out of
[Unknown]: it.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest]: If it wasn't, if I was still being paid the 250 bucks that I got in the beginning, I'd
[Guest]: have been out of here ages ago, because at the end of the day, you have to pay your rent.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: And I don't see what is wrong with getting a proper wage for a proper job.
[Amit Varma]: And when they go together, that's great when, you know, the calling and the profession go
[Guest]: together and there's no conflict and that's great.
[Guest]: But it is.
[Guest]: And it's like you could flip the argument to any other profession.
[Guest]: I mean, medical profession is supposed to be a calling.
[Guest]: It's supposed to be about saving lives, but you try walking out of a doctor's thing without
[Amit Varma]: paying for it and see how far you get.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, the incentives have to be right.
[Guest]: They have to be properly.
[Amit Varma]: That's, that's the way human nature is.
[Amit Varma]: I want to end with, in my usual systematic way, four questions, which I won't ask all
[Amit Varma]: of them at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: I'll go one by one.
[Amit Varma]: When you joined journalism, or when you first wanted to join journalism, when you got that
[Amit Varma]: spark as a young person, why did you have that spark?
[Guest]: What did you expect from it?
[Guest]: There was an internal and an external thing.
[Guest]: The external drive was that, you know, Moor Market, which used to be famed for second
[Guest]: hand books in Tamil Nadu, used to be a haunt for first my father and then I developed the
[Guest]: habit as well.
[Guest]: Dad used to buy books.
[Guest]: I was intrigued by some of these magazines that you could find.
[Guest]: Ancient copies of Esquire and so I'd never heard of these.
[Guest]: And unlike today, we don't have a reference point.
[Guest]: So it was a random copy of the New Yorker, a random copy of Esquire, in fact, random
[Guest]: copies of newspapers sometimes.
[Guest]: And this was my first exposure to something that was not called the Hindu, which is the
[Guest]: paper that for some reason, ubiquitous Chennai paper, Chennai paper, because your parents
[Guest]: tell you that you read the Hindu in order to improve your English, which is probably
[Guest]: the worst advice that they can, could have given at that time, but all that apart.
[Guest]: And when I read it, I looked at things that I vaguely heard about here and there and the
[Guest]: way it was read out and all that, it fascinated me.
[Guest]: And then I compared it with what I was getting in the domestic press.
[Guest]: And I was like, look, there is so much more that can be done.
[Guest]: And coincidentally, around the same time, I found myself at a party where there was
[Guest]: this editor Aditi Dey, who was then with the Indian Express back in Chennai.
[Guest]: And she saw some, I mean, we were arguing about something or the other and my usual
[Guest]: passionate mid-twenties, explosive sort of language and all that.
[Guest]: And she suddenly tapped me on the shoulder and said, listen, why don't you write this
[Guest]: as an essay for me?
[Guest]: I tried doing that.
[Guest]: I love the process of thinking through something and testing it for stresses at various points
[Guest]: in the argument and finding some kind of answer.
[Guest]: Somebody once said that I write to figure out what I'm thinking.
[Guest]: I found that process then.
[Guest]: And this kind of hooked me into it.
[Guest]: And I pretty much I think at that point, you know, when in 70s India, if you're a college
[Guest]: dropout with no marketable skills you did, I realized this is what I wanted to do.
[Guest]: And you know what, after all this, I don't look back at those 29 years as a journalist,
[Guest]: another three years as a freelancer, occasionally getting gigs with even the slightest tinge
[Guest]: of regret.
[Guest]: It wasn't worth it because of, you know, the kind of things that you're exposed to and
[Amit Varma]: the kind of.
[Amit Varma]: And it was as much personal self-discovery is, you know, exactly right.
[Amit Varma]: My second question then is that if you were 18 years old today, would you want to be a
[Amit Varma]: journalist?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, why?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And I keep getting this question in the colleges that I speak in.
[Guest]: One of the thing is, you know, today when you speak in a college, the questions are
[Guest]: all pessimistic.
[Guest]: The last time I spoke at a journalism college, for instance, the first question that I got
[Guest]: was in this era of declining media credibility, how do I ensure that at least my personal
[Guest]: credibility is built and protected?
[Guest]: It's a startling question to get from a 19 or 20 year old kid.
[Guest]: But that's...
[Amit Varma]: Who, by the way, are way smarter than we were when we were 18 or 19, so you know, that alone
[Guest]: should give you some hope.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: The answer I constantly make is, yeah, if I was in your position right now and I had
[Guest]: to make this choice all over again, I would still choose journalism because everything
[Guest]: that you're seeing and hearing and every development that you see around you, it reinforces the
[Guest]: thought that nothing can be more important in a democracy than the job of providing accurate
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: It is dichotomous for us to constantly talk of this as the age of information, the era
[Guest]: of data, the era of information and all of that and say, look, is there any value to
[Guest]: providing information in the first place?
[Guest]: We have not been able to monetize this thing.
[Guest]: That's a whole other argument.
[Guest]: And like you said, hopefully there's some 20 year old somewhere who's working on that
[Guest]: and will crack it.
[Amit Varma]: Who will get his idea at the end of this podcast.
[Guest]: But I cannot think, in fact, if I thought of whether it was more important for me to
[Guest]: be a journalist in the same 90s as opposed to today, I would say today, it's it's
[Amit Varma]: So you'd say that then you were driven by the need for personal self-discovery and what
[Amit Varma]: it did to you.
[Amit Varma]: And today you'd be driven more by that.
[Guest]: This is required.
[Guest]: This is an awareness of what happens if this didn't happen.
[Guest]: What happens if we didn't do what we do or the larger media universe didn't do what it
[Guest]: ideally should.
[Guest]: The dangers are far more obvious now than they they were to me, at least at that point
[Amit Varma]: in time.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you my last two questions together and you're probably expecting it.
[Amit Varma]: One, what makes you hopeful about the future of media and the future of India?
[Guest]: And two, what worries you?
[Guest]: What worries me?
[Guest]: I'll take that first is the is the general if it's still talking about the media, what
[Guest]: worries me is the general it's not cluelessness.
[Guest]: I speak to editors and I realize they know precisely what the flashpoints are, precisely
[Guest]: what the fault lines are, precisely what they need to do to address it, precisely what they
[Guest]: need to do for their own and organizational credibilities.
[Guest]: And then they rationalize not doing it very systematically.
[Guest]: And I listen to them talk and I'm thinking to myself, you know what he's saying is wrong.
[Guest]: And in a private off record conversation is still trying to justify the indefensible.
[Guest]: And that worries the hell out of me.
[Guest]: Because if these are the people who are the thought leaders and these are the people who
[Guest]: are shaping this industry.
[Guest]: And if they have gotten to a point where they've just given up and now are looking only for
[Guest]: self justification, then we have a major problem.
[Guest]: If there is at least the internal awareness and the willingness to recognize that something
[Guest]: is going wrong and we need to think of solutions, like you said earlier, the two of us in this
[Guest]: podcast are not going to solve the media's economic problems, but we at least need to
[Guest]: understand that the economic problem is fundamental to the larger problem.
[Guest]: If that is not happening, yeah, that makes me despair.
[Guest]: What makes me hopeful for this business or this industry in particular is again to go
[Guest]: back to the fact that I've lately spent a lot of time either teaching or lecturing at
[Guest]: colleges and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And I would think this is the last possible or the worst possible moment in time for a
[Guest]: young, hopeful, smart graduate to get into a postgraduate course on journalism.
[Guest]: But the numbers keep growing.
[Guest]: I'm astonished when I go, for instance, to an ACGA and find that there are 300 students
[Guest]: in the digital media stream.
[Guest]: And they are young, they're enthusiastic, they're not saying, you know, let's just get
[Guest]: in there and be Rajeev Sardesai or Arnab Goswami.
[Guest]: The questions they ask and the kind of things that they want to know.
[Amit Varma]: They really want to figure it out.
[Guest]: Yeah, they want to figure it out.
[Guest]: They want to say, how do we tell good stories is one of the most common questions we get.
[Guest]: And if this generation is still thinking that way, at least not all the 300 may make it
[Guest]: to a position of influence, but enough of them will actually be doing the kind of work
[Guest]: they want to do.
[Guest]: And hopefully they will break through some of the stuff.
[Guest]: And I'll also point you at this other phenomenon, which doesn't get noticed enough, that a lot
[Guest]: of the bright young journalists who came after us, the next generation journalists, take
[Guest]: the Priyanka Dubey's or the Snigdha Poonam's and people like that, they seem completely
[Guest]: comfortable moving out of the mainstream media space, going and doing the kind of stories
[Guest]: they want, and then going to the media and saying, look, I'm doing the story, do you
[Guest]: want it or no, and they're getting published, and they're doing brilliant work.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, in the existing system, there are enough people saying, look, I mean,
[Guest]: I don't want to be part of this mass marketing of bullshit.
[Guest]: I want to do the stories that matter, or the stories that should matter.
[Guest]: And then there is the next generation saying, I want to be part of this business.
[Guest]: And I want to know how to do it right.
[Guest]: And I want to know how to do it with credibility and quality.
[Guest]: And that, for me, makes me slightly hopeful.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, again, it's the optimist in me speaking, but...
[Amit Varma]: It's a great note of hope to end on, you know, old fogies like us have more questions than
[Amit Varma]: answers.
[Amit Varma]: And here's hoping that the young people studying journalism today in more than just a formal
[Amit Varma]: sense, come up with some of those answers, which we desperately need.
[Guest]: Prem, it's been an honor to have you on the show.
[Guest]: Pleasure, man.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to the show, do follow Prem on Twitter at Prem Panicker.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And to browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen, head on over to sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you're in the mood for more podcasting fun, check out this new show presented by
[Amit Varma]: Spartan Poker called Mera Kaam Poker, which is hosted by Azeem Banatwala and Peter Abraham.
[Amit Varma]: The show captures the fun side of poker and is a must listen for everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, it's not only the fun side, I used to be a poker professional and I've been on
[Amit Varma]: a past episode of Mera Kaam Poker talking strategy.
[Amit Varma]: You want to kill the game and make a lot of money?
[Amit Varma]: Listen to that episode at least.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes are out on the IVM podcast website, the IVM podcast app, or wherever you listen
[Amit Varma]: to podcasts.
[Unknown]: Excuse me, bhaiya.
[Unknown]: Excuse me.
[Unknown]: Bole, madam.
[Unknown]: Menu mein kya hai?
[Unknown]: Menu mein Scene Unseen hai, Podcast hai, On Course hai, Cyrus Says hai, Marry in India,
[Unknown]: Rediscovery Project, Empowering Series, Sex Wax hai, IVM Likes hai, Simplified hai, Keeping
[Unknown]: It Queer hai, Things and Destinations hai, My Neighbour Zuckerberg hai, and The Fan Garage
[Unknown]: hai.
[Unknown]: Aapko kya chahiye hai?
[Unknown]: Ek baar repeat kar denge kya?
[Unknown]: Repeat-repeat nahi karta hum.
[Unknown]: Aap jaao ivmpodcast.com pe aur suno yeh sab, ya phir download karo unka app, sab aapki
[Unknown]: thumliyon pe.